docs: tw-1010-arbos (#3534)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: docs/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/arbos.mdx

content_type: concept
---

> ArbOS is the child-EVM virtual machine monitor (VMM) for <a data-quicklook-from="arbitrum-nitro">Arbitrum Nitro</a>: a trusted system component that lives inside the [State Transition Function (STF)](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/01-stf-gentle-intro.mdx) and provides the execution environment for the chain. Unlike a conventional operating system, ArbOS is not a process running beside the chain—it's ordinary Go code compiled into the STF, so every node (and <a data-quicklook-from="fraud-proof">fraud prover</a>) can replay it deterministically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ArbOS is the child-EVM virtual machine monitor (VMM) for <a data-quicklook-from="arbitrum-nitro">Arbitrum Nitro</a>. It's a trusted system component that lives inside the [State Transition Function (STF)](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/01-stf-gentle-intro.mdx) and provides the execution environment for the chain. Unlike a conventional operating system, ArbOS is not a process running beside the chain—it's ordinary Go code compiled into the STF, so every node (and <a data-quicklook-from="fraud-proof">fraud prover</a>) can replay it deterministically.
```

## Core responsibilities

> 1. **Network resource management**: Allocating and tracking the required resources to execute <a data-quicklook-from="child-chain">child-chain</a> transactions and pricing them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Network resource management**: Allocating and tracking the required resources to execute <a data-quicklook-from="child-chain">child-chain</a> <a data-quicklook-from="transaction">transactions</a> and pricing them.
```

2. **Block production**: Turning [Sequencer](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/sequencer.mdx)-delivered messages into child-chain blocks with correct state updates.

> 3. **Cross-chain messaging**: Enabling cross-chain communication between <a data-quicklook-from="parent-chain">parent</a> and child chains for deposits, withdrawals, and <a data-quicklook-from="retryable-ticket">retryable tickets</a>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Cross-chain messaging**: Enabling cross-chain communication between <a data-quicklook-from="parent-chain">parent</a> and <a data-quicklook-from="child-chain">child chains</a> for deposits, withdrawals, and <a data-quicklook-from="retryable-ticket">retryable tickets</a>.
```

Author: dup

4. **Enhanced EVM execution**: Running instrumented <a data-quicklook-from="geth">Geth</a> to execute <a data-quicklook-from="smart-contract">smart contracts</a> with child-chain specific logic.
5. **<a data-quicklook-from="stylus">Stylus</a> support**: Managing <a data-quicklook-from="host-io">host I/O</a>, memory, and execution context for <a data-quicklook-from="wasm">WASM</a>-based contracts.

## Architecture: the Geth "sandwich"

> Rather than implementing the EVM, Arbitrum embeds it. The core of execution is _unmodified-in-spirit_, and still Geth—the same engine that defines the Ethereum standard. ArbOS wraps Geth on both sides, an arrangement we call the sandwich.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rather than implementing the EVM, Arbitrum embeds it. The core of execution is still Geth, modified only in minor ways—the same engine that defines the Ethereum standard. ArbOS wraps Geth on both sides, an arrangement we call the sandwich.
```

- **Top slice** (pre-processing): Before the EVM runs, ArbOS injects a system "start block" transaction, fixes the parent-chain context (block number, timestamp, base fee), prices incoming data, and applies any transaction filtering.
- **Filling** (Geth core): Geth executes EVM transactions.

> - **Bottom slice** (post-processing): After the EVM runs, ArbOS settles fees, records cross-chain messages, and finalizes the block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Bottom slice** (post-processing): After the EVM runs, ArbOS settles fees, records <a data-quicklook-from="crosschain-message">cross-chain messages</a>, and finalizes the block.
```

## Messages and blocks

> Sequencer inputs arrive as `L1IncomingMessage` objects. ArbOS turns each message into exactly one child-chain block—a bijective relationship:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<a data-quicklook-from="sequencer">Sequencer</a> inputs arrive as `L1IncomingMessage` objects. ArbOS turns each message into exactly one child-chain block—a bijective relationship:
```

For every `L1IncomingMessage`, there is a child-chain block with a unique block hash, and for every child-chain block after chain initialization, there is an `L1IncomingMessage` that produced it.

> `ProduceBlock` consumes one message and emits one block. Each block always begins with an injected `ArbitrumInternalTx` "start block" transaction that stamps in the parent-chain block number, timestamp, and L1 base fee. Because every value the EVM can observe as "now" is frozen into that opening system transaction, two nodes replaying the same message cannot disagree about the result—determinism is structural, not bolted on. ArbOS may include more system transactions during processing, for example batch-posting reports.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ProduceBlock` consumes one message and emits one block. After genesis, each block always begins with an injected `ArbitrumInternalTx` "start block" transaction that stamps in the parent-chain block number, and L1 base fee. Because every value the EVM can observe as "now" is frozen into that opening system transaction, two nodes replaying the same message cannot disagree about the result—determinism is structural, not bolted on. ArbOS may include more system transactions during processing, for example batch-posting reports.
```

## ArbOS state

ArbOS keeps its books in the same Geth state trie that holds account balances, under a reserved system address. The `ArbosState` object is a typed overlay on that raw key-value store. It is partitioned into subspaces, each identified by a one-byte prefix, and a set of fixed-scalar slots ("offsets") at the root.

Most of this state is reachable from contracts through <a data-quicklook-from="precompile">precompiles</a>. Two components deserve special mention because they back headline features:

> - `sendMerkle` is the accumulator that records every L2 → L1 message; its root is what the parent-chain <a data-quicklook-from="outbox">Outbox</a> verifies against when a withdrawal is finalized. See [child-to-parent messaging](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/l2-to-l1-messaging.mdx) for how a withdrawal proves against that root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `sendMerkle` is the accumulator that records every <a data-quicklook-from="L2">L2</a> → L1 message; its root is what the parent-chain <a data-quicklook-from="outbox">Outbox</a> verifies against when a withdrawal is finalized. See [child-to-parent messaging](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/l2-to-l1-messaging.mdx) for how a withdrawal proves against that root.
```

- `programs` hold Stylus <a data-quicklook-from="activation">activation</a> state, which is why WASM contracts can be priced and executed deterministically.

For the subspace-by-subspace breakdown, including `blockhashes`, `l1PricingState`, and `l2PricingState`, see the [ArbOS state reference](/how-arbitrum-works/reference/arbos-reference.mdx#arbos-state).

## Gas and fees

- Child-chain execution is priced by `l2PricingState`, which runs a dynamic base-fee mechanism. A gas pool tracks demand across a time window, pushing that base fee up under load and down when idle, smoothing spikes while preserving capacity.

> - Parent-chain data is tracked by `l1PricingState`, which records what the [batch poster](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/sequencer.mdx#batch-posting) spent posting compressed data to Ethereum and reimburses the batch poster from user fees.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Parent-chain data is tracked by `l1PricingState`, which records what the [batch poster](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/sequencer.mdx#batch-posting) spent posting compressed data to Ethereum and reimburses the <a data-quicklook-from="batch-poster">batch poster</a> from user fees.
```

Fees are routed to the configured network and infrastructure fee accounts.

For the complete breakdown, including the pricing formulas and the per-block gas limit, see [Gas and fees](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/gas-and-fees.mdx). For how ArbOS meters calldata and reimburses the batch poster, see [parent chain gas pricing](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/gas-and-fees.mdx#parent-chain-gas-pricing).

## Precompiles

> ArbOS exposes system functionality to contracts through precompiles—addresses that look like ordinary contracts to Solidity but are implemented in Go. The binding works through runtime reflection:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ArbOS exposes system functionality to contracts through <a data-quicklook-from="precompile">precompiles</a>—addresses that look like ordinary contracts to Solidity but are implemented in Go. The binding works through runtime reflection:
```

- A Solidity interface defines the ABI.
- A Go backend implements the methods.
- At startup, ArbOS uses reflection to verify that the Go implementation matches the generated ABI exactly and to route incoming calls to the right method.

This lets an EVM CALL reach native operating-system code without breaking the EVM’s type and ABI guarantees. Some precompiles (or specific methods) are gated to a minimum ArbOS version.

For the reflection and dispatch mechanics, see the [precompile architecture reference](/how-arbitrum-works/reference/arbos-reference.mdx#how-precompiles-work). For every precompile, its address, and its methods, see the [precompiles reference](/arbitrum-essentials/precompiles/reference.mdx).

## Retryables

> Retryable tickets are a special message type that enables atomic parent-to-child messaging: a ticket is created on the parent chain and redeemed on the child chain, with funds and execution handled together. Retryable state lives in the `retryables` subspace. See the [parent-to-child messaging](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/l1-to-l2-messaging.mdx) documentation for the full lifecycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<a data-quicklook-from="retryable-ticket">Retryable tickets</a> are a special message type that enables atomic parent-to-child messaging: a ticket is created on the parent chain and redeemed on the child chain, with funds and execution handled together. Retryable state lives in the `retryables` subspace. See the [parent-to-child messaging](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/l1-to-l2-messaging.mdx) documentation for the full lifecycle.
```

Author: dup

## ArbOS versions and upgrades

Because the STF must stay deterministic across every node and across every historical replay, ArbOS cannot change behavior simply by shipping a new binary—old blocks must still reproduce exactly. Upgrades are therefore scheduled as onchain events.

- ArbOS stores its current version, the `upgradeVersion` it plans to move to, and the `upgradeTimestamp` at which to switch (offsets 0-2 of state).
- At the appointed time, the storage format and execution semantics roll forward identically across all nodes.

> This is how the chain has evolved over time—for example, Stylus activated at ArbOS version 30—without ever replacing the operating system out from under its own history. Each version bump is gated behind a named constant in the chain parameters, so behavioral changes are tied to a specific, agreed-upon version rather than wall-clock client releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is how the chain has evolved over time—for example, Stylus activated at ArbOS version 30—without ever replacing the operating system out from under its own history. Each version bump is gated behind a named constant in the chain parameters, so behavioral changes are tied to a specific, agreed-upon version rather than wall-clock <a data-quicklook-from="client">client</a> releases.
```
